source: https://www.ace-hta.gov.sg/docs/default-source/acgs/acg-t2dm-personalising-medications.pdf

page 1

The document titled “ACE CLINICAL GUIDANCE” is subtitled “Type 2 diabetes mellitus - Personalising management with non-insulin medications” and was published on 17 May 2023. It can be accessed on the website www.ace-hta.gov.sg. The objective of this clinical guidance is to optimise the management of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) using non-insulin diabetes medications. This clinical guidance is relevant to all healthcare professionals caring for patients with T2DM, such as those in primary care.

An estimated 537 million adults, aged between 20 to 79 years, are living with diabetes, which accounts for 1 in 10 adults. Over the past three decades, diabetes has been one of the top ten drivers of increasing mortality and disease burden worldwide. In Singapore, diabetes was the sixth leading cause of combined mortality and disease burden in 2019. According to the National Population Health Survey conducted from 2019 to 2020, 9.5% of residents aged 18 to 74 had diabetes mellitus. Among those who self-reported having diabetes and attended the survey-related health examination, a quarter had poor glycaemic control. 

More than 95% of people with diabetes have type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). Since 2015, the approach to managing T2DM has changed due to the publication of clinical trials demonstrating the cardiovascular and renal benefits of some newer classes of T2DM medications. However, in Singapore, despite the increasing availability of such medications, metformin and sulphonylureas continue to be the main medications used by patients with T2DM. In line with international recommendations, this Appropriate Care Guide (ACG) encourages healthcare professionals to optimise the management of T2DM by personalising the selection of non-insulin T2DM medications. This personalisation is based on patient comorbidities and risk factors, particularly cardiovascular and renal factors.

The Statement of Intent for the ACE Clinical Guidance (ACG) outlines its purpose and scope. The ACG provides concise, evidence-based recommendations that serve as a common starting point for clinical decision-making at the national level. These recommendations are underpinned by a wide array of considerations that are contextualised to Singapore and are based on the best available evidence at the time of development. The ACG is not exhaustive and does not replace clinical judgement. The recommendations in the ACG are not mandatory. The responsibility for making decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual patient remains at all times with the healthcare professional. This ensures that patient care is personalised and takes into account the unique needs and circumstances of each individual.

page 2

Clinical needs assessment: Recommendation 1:  Assess the patient's glycaemic control and risk of adverse cardiorenal outcomes. Assessment of a patient's glycaemic control and their risk of adverse cardiorenal outcomes is critical to guide appropriate T2DM treatment, given their significant impact on diabetes morbidity and mortality. In this ACG, these two areas—glycaemic control, and risk of adverse cardiorenal outcomes—are referred to as the patient's 'clinical needs'. For patients with newly diagnosed T2DM, assess their clinical needs before discussing and deciding about appropriate treatment. For ongoing patients, reassess the patient's clinical needs against their current management goals and response. In both cases, complement this assessment with an evaluation of the patient's overall health status (see Figure 1 Patient's overall health status on page 3). Glycaemic control. The goal of T2DM management is to prevent or delay diabetes-related complications while improving the quality of life of patients.^4 A core part of this has been, and still remains, maintaining good glycaemic control in order to reduce the risk of microvascular complications. The target for Glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) should be individualised based on the patient's overall health status, in consultation with the patient. For most patients, a target HbA1c of ≤7.0% provides a reasonable balance between a reduction in risk of microvascular complications and risk of hypoglycaemia. There are certain situations where a more stringent HbA1c target (e.g., ≤6.5%) may be appropriate. These include younger patients, patients with a short duration of disease, patients with a long life expectancy, and patients with early-stage microvascular complications (particularly retinopathy and nephropathy). Conversely, there are also situations where a less stringent HbA1c target (e.g., ≤8.0%) may be appropriate. These include older patients, especially if frail, patients with a long duration of disease, patients with a short life expectancy, and patients with advanced microvascular or macrovascular complications.

Patients with diabetes are at an increased risk of developing cardiovascular disease (CVD), with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD) being the leading cause of morbidity and mortality for patients with diabetes. Related to CVD is the association between diabetes and an increased rate of hospitalisation for heart failure. In addition, patients with diabetes may also develop kidney-related complications, with diabetic kidney disease being the most common cause of end-stage kidney disease (ESKD). The increased risk for progression to ESKD is concomitantly accompanied by an increased risk of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. Hence, cardiorenal risk reduction is also a critical consideration for patients with T2DM, particularly now that there are T2DM medications which have been shown to reduce this risk.

page 3

The chart titled "Figure 1: Personalising T2DM medications" provides a flowchart for personalizing Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM) medications. It takes into account various factors such as the patient's overall health status, concurrent treatment factors, wellbeing and social support factors, and medication-related factors. The patient's overall health status includes age or frailty, life expectancy and quality of life, and comorbidities. Concurrent treatment factors include the current treatment, risk factors that may reduce treatment adherence, and recent changes to health or life circumstances. Wellbeing and social support factors consider the patient's wellbeing and social support, and cognitive ability. Medication-related factors include patient adherence, safety considerations such as the risk of hypoglycaemia, implications on weight, cost and affordability, route of administration, dosing frequency, and patient preferences, needs, and values. The chart outlines three primary steps: A: Assess Clinical Needs: This involves assessing the patient's current HbA1c relative to target HbA1c, the presence of risk of hypoglycaemia, and the presence of microvascular complications. It also considers the risk of adverse cardiorenal outcomes, history of CVD or CKD, presence of macrovascular complications, risk of CVD based on risk factors such as obesity, hypertension, dyslipidaemia, smoking, family history of premature coronary disease, CKD, or presence of albuminuria, and risk of CKD based on risk factors such as CVD, hypertension, obesity, family history of CKD or ESKD, history of AKI, age (especially ≥ 65 years), or smoking. B: Select & Adjust T2DM Medications Based on Clinical Needs: This involves selecting medication(s) proven to reduce HbA1c, reduce cardiorenal risk (beyond glycaemic control), and reduce both HbA1c and cardiorenal risk. C: Review Response to T2DM Treatment and Progress Against Goals: This involves reviewing the patient's response to the T2DM treatment and their progress against the set goals. D: Discuss & Agree on T2DM Management with Patient: This involves discussing and agreeing on the T2DM management plan with the patient. The chart concludes with a note that all ACG, a.k.a. ACE Clinical Guidance; BMI, body mass index; CKD, chronic kidney disease; CVD, cardiovascular disease; ESKD, end-stage kidney disease; HbA1c, glycated haemoglobin. The points listed in the figure provide examples of factors to be considered; it is not an exhaustive list.

page 4

Pharmacological treatment plays a key role in managing Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM) for most, if not all, patients. Medications are to be used in conjunction with lifestyle intervention. Patients may require medications soon after diagnosis, or after a period of lifestyle intervention alone, typically around 3 to 6 months. This ACG focuses on personalising non-insulin T2DM medications, acknowledging that insulin still has an important role in the management of T2DM.

Lifestyle intervention is a cornerstone of successful T2DM management. All international guidelines advocate lifestyle intervention as essential to prevent and manage T2DM. A healthy lifestyle can have a direct impact on glycaemic control and Cardiovascular Disease (CVD) risk, with the latter being a major cause of mortality among patients with T2DM. Even moderate weight loss (5% of body weight) in patients who are overweight or obese can decrease insulin resistance, improve glycaemic control, reduce the need for T2DM medications, and reduce the risk of CVD. For patients with Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) who are overweight or obese, weight loss is also associated with a reduction in albuminuria and proteinuria. Many local resources and programs provide information to encourage those at risk of T2DM or living with T2DM to adopt a healthy lifestyle. These include eating a healthy balanced diet, maintaining a healthy weight, exercising regularly, limiting alcohol, quitting smoking, and improving mental well-being and managing stress. Examples of patient resources and programs include Guide to Healthy Eating for Managing Diabetes Mellitus, Let's B.E.A.T. Diabetes or 3 Be's to Beat Diabetes (National Diabetes Reference Materials).

Many patients with T2DM may require and benefit from insulin therapy. When clinically indicated, insulin therapy should be commenced without delay. Typically, insulin therapy is started when patients are unable to reach their glycaemic targets despite optimal treatment with non-insulin T2DM medications alone, or for those with symptomatic hyperglycaemia. Appropriate weight management and other lifestyle interventions remain important. Insulin therapy is usually introduced by initiating basal insulin (intermediate- or long-acting insulin). When starting insulin therapy, review concomitant T2DM medications and continue where appropriate; and educate patients and their carers about preventing and managing hypoglycaemia. For further information, see ACG on Initiating basal insulin in type 2 diabetes mellitus at website of https://www.ace-hta.gov.sg/healthcare-professionals/ace-clinical-guidances-(acgs)/details/initiating-basal-insulin-in-type-2-diabetes-mellitus. 

page 5

Recommendation 2: Select and adjust T2DM medication(s) based on the patient's glycaemic control and their risk of adverse cardiorenal outcomes. Dual focus in T2DM management  The focus on glycaemic control and risk of adverse cardiorenal outcomes continues into T2DM management, with these clinical needs underpinning T2DM medication selection. This approach represents a significant shift from centering treatment decisions solely on achieving glycaemic control, with recent major international guidelines all recommending reduction of cardiorenal risk as an equally important focus of T2DM management. Other considerations for T2DM medication selection. In addition to clinical needs, other factors that should be considered in the medication selection process (see Figure 1 on page 3) include: the patient's overall health status  medicationrelated factors which may influence patient adherence; further information about these factors can be found in a clinician infographic, Type 2 diabetes mellitus – personalising management with noninsulin diabetes medications; the patient's preferences, needs and values. 

For example, consider two hypothetical scenarios involving two 55yearold patients newly diagnosed with T2DM. In both scenarios, all the abovementioned factors should be discussed with the patient to determine the most appropriate medication(s) for the patient's current situation. There may be additional considerations that may not have been previously discussed or warrants revisiting (e.g., in Scenario 2, it is worth clarifying the patient's circumstances and preferences in relation to the cost of treatment).

SCENARIO 1 : Glycaemic control (Current HbA1c: 7.8%, target: ≤7.0%, No T2DM symptoms and No signs of T2DM complications), Risk of adverse cardiorenal outcomes (Nothing remarkable (besides T2DM)), Patient’s overall health status (No notable issues), Medication-related factors which may influence patient adherence (No particular issues), Patient preferences, needs and values (Prefers oral, once-daily medications) and Personalising, T2DM medication selection (The patient's main clinical need is HbA1c reduction. All T2DM medications have been proven to reduce HbA1c, and in the absence of any compelling reasons to consider an alternative, metformin monotherapy is likely a suitable starting option for this patient Metformin immediaterelease formulations may require several doses per day; this patient may prefer to use an extendedrelease oncedaily formulation (at commencement, or after a short stabilisation and titration period with the immediaterelease formulation)). These scenarios draw on some of the factors highlighted in Figure 1; these factors were chosen as examples and do not include all possible considerations.

SCENARIO 2: Glycaemic control (Current HbA1c: 7.8%, target: ≤7.0%,  No T2DM symptoms, No signs of T2DM complications), Risk of adverse cardiorenal outcomes (BMI 29 kg/m²; smoker, CKD (albuminuria category A2)), Patient’s overall health status (No notable issues), Medication-related factors which may influence patient adherence (Medications which cause weight gain may be an issue) ,Patient preferences, needs and values (Prefers oral, once-daily medications) and Personalising T2DM medication selection (The patient's clinical needs are HbA1c reduction and cardiorenal risk reduction., Sodiumglucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors or glucagonlike peptide1 receptor agonists (GLP1 RAs) confer protection against cardiovascular events (CVD) in addition to reducing HbA1c, and both are associated with weight loss, but their efficacy as initial T2DM monotherapy has yet to be fully established. To offset this, it is possible to consider sequential addition to or dual therapy with metformin., When deciding between SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP1 RAs, the expected benefits from cardiorenal risk, reduction, HbA1c reduction, and weight loss need to be balanced against the available routes of administration and cost (see Recommendation 4 on page 7) for the patient.) These scenarios draw on some of the factors highlighted in Figure 1; these factors were chosen as examples and do not include all possible considerations.

page 6

Recommendation 3 for T2DM Management: Choose Metformin as the Primary Medication: Metformin Advantages: For most patients with T2DM, metformin, when used alongside lifestyle changes, is a strong initial medication choice. It’s effective at reducing the HbA1c levels and the incidence of diabetes related complications, including heart attacks and strokes. The risk of severe low blood sugar events is low with metformin, and it has longterm safety records. Due to its availability, affordability, and track record, metformin is an excellent first medication for T2DM individuals. In patients with contraindication or intolerance to metformin [e.g., if estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) <30 mL/min/1.73m2], the choice of first-line T2DM medication should  follow the considerations.

Recommendation 3 for T2DM Management: Choose Metformin as the Primary Medication:  Metformin is compared favorably to sulphonylureas in terms of both effectiveness and safety when used as monotherapy for Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM). Both medications effectively reduce HbA1c levels to a similar degree, but sulphonylureas are associated with greater weight gain and a higher risk of hypoglycemia. However, there is limited systematic data available for comparing metformin to newer T2DM medication classes, particularly as a first-line treatment. Most international guidelines recommend metformin as the first-line medication for T2DM. Nonetheless, some guidelines suggest that Sodium-Glucose Co-Transporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors or Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists (GLP-1 RAs) may also be suitable initial treatments, especially for patients with T2DM who are at high risk of developing atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (ASCVD), heart failure, or chronic kidney disease (CKD). This recommendation is based on increasing evidence supporting the cardiovascular and renal benefits of SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1 RAs, as well as limited post-hoc subgroup analyses suggesting that these benefits may exist independently of metformin use. Since most primary studies involving SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1 RAs typically include patients taking other concurrent medications, primarily metformin, the efficacy of these newer medications as monotherapy has yet to be fully established.

Recommendation 3 for T2DM Management: Choose Metformin as the Primary Medication:  When initiating treatment with monotherapy, it allows for careful monitoring of both the positive and negative effects of the new medication. Patients should undergo regular reviews, such as after three months, to assess treatment response and adjust dosage if necessary. However, in certain situations, starting with dual therapy may be considered. For instance, dual therapy may be appropriate for patients for whom monotherapy alone is not expected to be sufficient, or when the initial HbA1c level is 1.5% or more above the target. Some international guidelines support this approach, recommending dual therapy, particularly for patients with higher initial HbA1c levels, to enhance the likelihood of achieving treatment goals and to expedite the attainment of glycemic targets. Additionally, dual therapy might be recommended due to the potential benefits offered by another medication independent of its effect on HbA1c. Recent meta-analyses have demonstrated significant reductions in HbA1c levels and similar risks of hypoglycemia when dipeptidyl peptidase-4 inhibitors (DPP4 inhibitors) or Sodium-Glucose Co-Transporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitors are used in combination with metformin compared to metformin alone.

Recommendation 3 for T2DM Management: Choose Metformin as the Primary Medication:  Managing the gastrointestinal side effects of metformin, including concerns about potential gastrointestinal side effects, can typically be minimized or managed by: Gradually titrating the dose slowly, Advising the patient to take metformin with or after food, Considering an extended-release formulation which may be better tolerated than an immediate-release formulation.

page 7 

Recommendation 4: Consider prescribing an SGLT2 inhibitor or GLP-1 RA for patients with T2DM who need to reduce their risk of adverse cardiorenal outcomes. Cardiorenal benefits of SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1 Ras. Cardiovascular outcome trials (CVOTs) report cardiorenal benefits associated with these two classes of T2DM medications in addition to improvements in glycaemic control. In Singapore, registered SGLT2 inhibitors include canagliflozin, dapagliflozin, empagliflozin, and ertugliflozin. Registered GLP-1 RAs include dulaglutide, liraglutide, lixisenatide, and semaglutide. In summary, at a class level, for the following key endpoints: Reducing major adverse cardiovascular events - SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1 RAs both significantly reduce the risk of major adverse cardiovascular events (composite endpoint of CV death, non-fatal myocardial infarction (MI), or non-fatal stroke), CV death and death from any cause, GLP-1 RAs significantly reduce the risk of non-fatal stroke but not non-fatal MI, while the converse was true for SGLT2 inhibitors. Reducing hospitalisation for heart failure: SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1 RAs both significantly reduce the risk of hospitalisation for heart failure, with SGLT2 inhibitors showing a larger effect. Reducing adverse renal outcomes: SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1 RAs both significantly reduce the risk of adverse renal outcomes (composite endpoint with varying definitions depending on study, e.g., doubling of serum creatinine levels, new-onset macroalbuminuria, 40% decrease in eGFR, progression to ESKD, or death from renal cause) with SGLT2 inhibitors showing a larger effect; the renal benefit of GLP-1 RAs is driven by a reduction in macroalbuminuria alone, without any significant reduction in hard endpoints of renal function (eGFR, doubling of serum creatinine, and progression to ESKD). For information on the reported benefits of individual SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1 RAs for each of the above-mentioned endpoints. 

Recommendation 4: Consider prescribing an SGLT2 inhibitor or GLP-1 RA for patients with T2DM who need to reduce their risk of adverse cardiorenal outcomes: Cardiovascular outcome trials (CVOTs). CVOTs have been mandated by the United States Food and Drug Administration since 2008 to evaluate cardiovascular safety of new T2DM medications. CVOTs involving DPP-4 inhibitors, SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1 RAs have demonstrated the cardiovascular safety of these classes (with the exception of saxagliptin which is associated with a significant increase in risk of hospitalisation for heart failure47). SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1 RAs have demonstrated cardiorenal benefits against placebo. While these studies have had a significant impact on the clinical treatment of T2DM, it is important to note, as with all clinical trials, the study’s primary intent, inclusions and parameters, which may affect the applicability of the findings to the wider T2DM population. Generally, at the time of study enrolment, most patients had a mean HbA1c between 6.6% and 8.7% and were already taking other T2DM medications (mostly metformin). Different studies included patients at different levels of risk for a cardiorenal event, with most patients having existing ASCVD, T2DM duration greater than 10 years, or a BMI in the overweight or obese category; some studies also included patients with or without heart failure and renal impairment. Several endpoints were reported, with differences in reported endpoints or endpoint definitions between studies. 

page 8 

Recommendation 4: Consider prescribing an SGLT2 inhibitor or GLP-1 RA for patients with T2DM who need to reduce their risk of adverse cardiorenal outcomes Patients requiring cardiorenal risk reduction. There is general agreement that patients with T2DM who have established ASCVD, heart failure or CKD would benefit from the cardiorenal risk reduction offered by SGLT2 inhibitors or GLP-1 RAs, independent of HbA1c levels. For those without established disease, the decision to reduce cardiorenal risk needs to be made on an individual basis, considering the patient's risk factors (see examples in Figure 1 on page 3).

Recommendation 4: Consider prescribing an SGLT2 inhibitor or GLP-1 RA for patients with T2DM who need to reduce their risk of adverse cardiorenal outcomes Patients requiring cardiorenal risk reduction. Other considerations before prescribing SGLT2 inhibitors or GLP-1 Ras. In addition to considering their cardiorenal benefits, the decision on the most appropriate medication for an individual patient must include consideration of the factors mentioned in Figure 1 on page 3. For SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1 RAs, discussion with the patient should include the following: Safety considerations: Risk of hypoglycaemia: Low for both classes – particularly relevant for patients who have met their HbA1c target but still require cardiorenal risk reduction (hypoglycaemia may occur when using either class in conjunction with sulphonylureas or insulin). SGLT2 inhibitors: Renal impairment: Dose adjustment(s) may be required, with eGFR cut-offs varying between medications and indications (e.g., using for glycaemic control vs other benefits such as reducing risk of ESKD or reducing the risk of hospitalisation for heart failure). Hepatic impairment: Use not recommended in severe hepatic impairment: Precautions: Reports of (euglycaemic) diabetic ketoacidosis, necrotising fasciitis of the perineum (Fournier's gangrene), symptomatic hypotension (especially in elderly and those on diuretics). Monitoring: patients with a higher risk for amputation events (canagliflozin). GLP-1 RAs: Renal impairment: Dose adjustment not required; use not recommended in ESKD (eGFR <15 mL/min/1.73m²). Hepatic impairment: Use not recommended in severe hepatic impairment. Precautions: Possible risk of acute pancreatitis and dehydration (may lead to acute renal failure or worsening renal impairment). Semaglutide (subcutaneous): Exercise caution in patients with history of diabetic retinopathy or treated with insulin. Impact on weight: Both classes are associated with weight loss (e.g., 2-3 kg with SGLT2 inhibitors, 1.1-4.4 kg with GLP-1 RAs*).Cost and affordability: Both classes relatively new, hence considerably more expensive than more established T2DM medication classes. See SGLT2 inhibitors and GLP-1 RAs available on government subsidy list via Route of administration and dosing frequency:  Once-daily oral dose form: all SGLT2 inhibitors and semaglutide, Once-daily subcutaneous injection: liraglutide and Once-weekly subcutaneous injection: dulaglutide and semaglutide.

page 9

Recommendation 4: Consider prescribing an SGLT2 inhibitor or GLP-1 RA for patients with T2DM who need to reduce their risk of adverse cardiorenal outcomes Patients requiring cardiorenal risk reduction. When glycemic control is the priority... All T2DM medications, including insulin, have been shown to reduce HbA1c levels. When used as add-on therapy to metformin, all T2DM medications show beneficial glucose-lowering efficacy compared to placebo. When improved glycemic control is a treatment priority, in addition to considering the desired treatment target and the glucose-lowering effects of the medication, personalize selection of a medication for an individual patient by considering the other factors listed in Figure 1 on page 3. For example: If cost is a significant factor for the patient, but there are no concerns with hypoglycaemia or weight gain, a sulphonylurea may be a reasonable addition to metformin. If it is important to avoid weight gain, medications that are weight neutral (e.g., DPP-4 inhibitors) or decrease weight (e.g., GLP-1 RAs, SGLT2 inhibitors) may be better options. Refer to the clinician infographic and medication table to inform prescribing decisions (see Useful resources on page 12).

Recommendation 5: Adopt a patient-centered approach to make shared decisions on T2DM management. Healthcare professionals are encouraged to adopt a patient-centered approach which involves engaging the patient in a tailored discussion about their T2DM and its management. Below are practical examples of a patient-centered approach when discussing T2DM management with patients.

Recommendation 5: Adopt a patient-centered approach to make shared decisions on T2DM management. Areas of discussion: Progressive nature of T2DM, its impact on the patient’s other comorbidities and their health; prognosis and management goals. Patient’s central role and the importance of being actively involved in their T2DM management. Available treatment options (including lifestyle intervention and insulin), how and when they fit into the overall management, and their benefits and risks. How progress of T2DM and impact of treatment will be monitored and who will be involved.

Recommendation 5: Adopt a patient-centered approach to make shared decisions on T2DM management. Examples of patient-centered approach: Progressive nature of T2DM, its impact on the patient’s other comorbidities and their health; prognosis and management goals: Check the patient’s understanding about their condition. Ask about the patient’s priorities in relation to T2DM in the context of their overall health, and what they hope to achieve. Encourage the patient to ask questions. Patient’s central role and the importance of being actively involved in their T2DM management: Gauge the patient’s interest and motivation to engage in self-management. Encourage the patient to receive complimentary care from multiple healthcare professionals and check that this is feasible. Available treatment options (including lifestyle intervention and insulin), how and when they fit into the overall management, and their benefits and risks. Ask the patient about their preferences and seek their input on decisions relating to their treatment. Ascertain the patient’s knowledge about their treatment and ensure they have the correct information to adhere to the agreed plan. How progress of T2DM and impact of treatment will be monitored and who will be involved: Ensure proposed follow-up plans are feasible and sustainable for the patient. Share HbA1c, and other test results with the patient (with context of their management goals) prior to their next appointment if possible, encouraging them to think over the results and prepare for their review.

page 10

Recommendation 5: Adopt a patient-centered approach to make shared decisions on T2DM management. Patient-centred care provides care that is respectful of and responsive to individual patient preferences, needs and values, and [ensures] that patient values guide all clinical decisions. It also encourages active collaboration and shared decision-making between the patient, their family and the healthcare professional team. For patients with diabetes, patient-centred care can improve glycemic control, patient self-management, patient and healthcare professional satisfaction, and reduce healthcare costs.

Recommendation 6: Educate patients with T2DM on sustained lifestyle intervention, medication adherence, and regular review. Education regarding T2DM management should be specific and relevant to the patient. Examples of practice tips are provided below. Where helpful, reinforce verbal information with written information.

Recommendation 6: Educate patients with T2DM on sustained lifestyle intervention, medication adherence, and regular review. Empower the patient to adopt a sustained healthy lifestyle: A healthy lifestyle can have a significant impact on T2DM management, and diabetes education and support is a critical aspect of this.7 Explain the importance of adopting a healthy lifestyle along with taking medications. Acknowledge and encourage the patient's role in making healthy lifestyle choices. Identify achievable, sustainable, and possibly incremental lifestyle interventions that suit the patient (see Lifestyle intervention on page 4 for examples of resources). Connect the patient to local services or other healthcare professionals (e.g., diabetes educator, dietitian) who can assist with lifestyle changes and provide support. 

Recommendation 6: Educate patients with T2DM on sustained lifestyle intervention, medication adherence, and regular review. Encourage the patient to adhere to their T2DM medications A local study reported poor medication adherence in 35% of patients with newly diagnosed diabetes. Poor medication adherence is associated with poorer glycemic control, increased use of medical resource, higher healthcare cost and mortality rates. Explain the benefits of T2DM medications and the importance and impact of good adherence (see Useful resources on page 12 for access to a patient education aid, Diabetes medications: a key to living well with diabetes). Provide opportunity to ask questions or clarify concerns about the agreed treatment. Offer tips and tools to foster good adherence (e.g., linking medication taking to daily routines, using pillboxes or medication reminder tools, involving family members). Check how the patient is coping with their medications at every encounter and be cognisant of the range of reasons that may contribute to poor adherence.

Recommendation 6: Educate patients with T2DM on sustained lifestyle intervention, medication adherence, and regular review. Engage the patient in a cycle of regular reviews. Regular consultations provide planned opportunities to review the patient's progress (see Recommendation 7 on page 11). Explain the reason for regular reviews and clarify what they involve. Involve other healthcare professionals as necessary. Ask the patient to self-monitor their blood glucose levels if deemed useful as part of their T2DM management. Acknowledge and affirm any improvements, and encourage persistence in areas that still require attention.

page 11

Recommendation 6: Educate patients with T2DM on sustained lifestyle intervention, medication adherence, and regular review. Engage the patient in a cycle of regular reviews. Recognising poor adherence to diabetes medications in practice. Poor medication adherence to diabetes medications may be associated with multiple factors: the treatment (e.g., dosing regimen complexity, safety and tolerability, cost concerns), the patient (e.g., perception and beliefs about the medication or condition, knowledge about the medications), and the healthcare team (e.g., the relationship between patient and healthcare professional). A well-executed, informal, open and non-judgmental conversation with a patient about how they are coping with their medications can be an effective and successful way of identifying issues with adherence.

Recommendation 7: Review parameters and frequency: Tailor the frequency of follow-up consultations. For example, review: every six months if the patient is doing well and meeting their agreed treatment goals every three months if the patient is not doing well or finding it challenging to achieve their treatment goals earlier as required, e.g., when starting, adjusting, or stopping a medication. Review parameters include HbA1c, blood pressure, weight, BMI, lipid profile, kidney parameters (such as eGFR and urinary albumin:creatinine ratio), smoking, eye and foot assessments. Complication screening should be conducted at least annually (e.g., kidney, eye and foot assessments). Local programs may provide useful resources and frameworks to facilitate regular reviews for patients with T2DM, such as the Chronic Disease Management Programme or Healthier SG Care Protocols.

Recommendation 7: Review parameters and frequency: Interdisciplinary care: Consider involving various healthcare professionals with complementary expertise to provide holistic care to the patient. For patients with diabetes, interdisciplinary care has been associated with improvements in patient outcomes (e.g., improved glycaemic control, reduction in blood pressure and lipid levels, improved quality of life) or processes of care (e.g., increased monitoring and complication screening). Importantly, interdisciplinary care must be coordinated (e.g., by the primary care clinician) to avoid confusion, duplication or gaps in care. In addition to involving an interdisciplinary team in providing routine T2DM care, there may be times when involvement of an appropriate medical specialist is required, for example for: patients with difficulty achieving glycaemic control despite appropriate management; patients with or at risk of frequent hypoglycaemia, diabetic ketoacidosis, or hyperglycaemic hyperosmolar state, regardless of HbA1c levels; patients with diabetes complications requiring active specialist management, including: Patients with foot ulceration, gangrene or severe foot infection (see ACG on Foot assessment in people with diabetes mellitus); Patients with concomitant CKD stage 3b or higher, or with unexpected or rapid decline in renal function (see ACG on Chronic kidney disease – early detection); Patients with diabetic macular oedema, severe non-proliferative diabetic retinopathy or unexplained drop in visual acuity/eye findings

page 12

References: Scan the QR code for the reference list to this clinical guidance and Useful resources: Scan the QR code to access the resources mentioned in this clinical guidance. The expert group is chaired by A/Prof Bee Yong Mong, an endocrinologist from SGH. The members of the group are diverse and come from various medical backgrounds. They include Dr Thofique Adamjee, an internal medicine specialist from KTPH; Ms Debra Chan Shu Zhen, a pharmacist from TTSH; and Ms Chieng Ying Jia Shermin, a nurse from NUP. The group also includes Clin Prof Terrance Chua, a cardiologist from the National Heart Centre Singapore; Dr Ajith Damodaran, a primary care physician from Serangoon Garden Clinic; and A/Prof Goh Su-Yen, an endocrinologist from SGH. Other members are A/Prof Michelle Jong from TTSH, Dr Khoo Chin Meng from NUH, and Dr Eric Khoo from Gleneagles Medical Centre, all of whom are endocrinologists. Dr Loke Kam Weng, a primary care physician from Keat Hong Family Medicine Clinic, is also part of the group. The group also includes Dr Alvin Ng Kok Heong, a nephrologist from Mount Elizabeth Novena Hospital; Dr Ng Huiwen Christine, a primary care physician from NUP; Dr Darren Seah Ee-Jin, a primary care physician from NHGP; and Dr Gilbert Tan Choon Seng, a primary care physician from SHP. Dr Cheryl Tan Ying Lin, a pharmacist from SGH; Dr Tham Tat Yean, a primary care physician from Frontier Healthcare Group; Prof Anantharaman Vathsala, a nephrologist from NUH; and Dr Woo Jia Wei, a cardiologist from Sunrise Heart and Internal Medicine Clinic, are also members of the expert group. 

About the Agency The Agency for Care Effectiveness (ACE) was established by the Ministry of Health (Singapore) to drive better decision-making in healthcare by conducting health technology assessments (HTA), publishing healthcare guidance and providing education. ACE develops ACE Clinical Guidance (ACGs) to inform specific areas of clinical practice. ACGs are usually reviewed around five years after publication, or earlier, if new evidence emerges that requires substantive changes to the recommendations. To access this ACG online, along with other ACGs published to date, please visit www.ace-hta.gov.sg/acg. Find out more about ACE at www.ace-hta.gov.sg/about-us. Agency for Care Effectiveness, Ministry of Health, Republic of Singapore All rights reserved. Reproduction of this publication in whole or in part in any material form is prohibited without the prior written permission of the copyright holder. Application to reproduce any part of this publication should be addressed to ACE_HTA@moh.gov.sg . Suggested citation: Agency for Care Effectiveness (ACE), Type 2 diabetes mellitus – personalising management with non-insulin medications. ACE Clinical Guidance (ACG), Ministry of Health, Singapore. 2023. Available from: gov.sg/acg/t2dm-personalising-medications. The Ministry of Health, Singapore disclaims any and all liability to any party for any direct, indirect, implied, punitive or consequential damages arising directly or indirectly from any use of this ACG, which is provided as is, without warranties. Agency for Care Effectiveness (ACE) College of Medicine Building 16 College Road Singapore [postal code]. Agency for Care Effectiveness - ACE | Agency for Care Effectiveness (ACE). Driving better decision-making in healthcare
