source: https://ch-api.healthhub.sg/api/public/content/8fcd2bf22c2f472c8efbe5c650e3969e?v=a8fc8264

page 1

Titled “Know your healthcare professionals who to look for in your journey of diabetes care and recovery journey. The  images features a Doctor, a Physiotherapist, an Ophthalmologist,  a team under Multi-disciplinary Diabetes Foot Care, a Dietitian, and a Nurse Counsellor. The photo credits acknowledge contributions from the National Healthcare Group (NHG), National University Health System (NUHS), SingHealth (SHS), Agency for Integrated Care (AIC), and Primary Care Network (PCN), noting that all images are re-produced with permissions. 

page 2

Roles of Healthcare Professionals for Diabetes Care. It is common for a person living with diabetes to receive treatment from a healthcare team consisting of different healthcare professionals. The following list serves as a broad guidance on the roles of healthcare professionals for diabetes care. Please note that the list is non-exhaustive, and the names of professions are interchangeable across settings.

General Practitioner makes the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus and works with you to come up with your treatment plan and treatment goals, then assesses the need for medications to lower blood sugar levels and determines the right medication and dose and finally, implements technology use where appropriate to empower towards effective self-management and patient education.

Endocrinologist is a doctor who specializes in diabetes and other diseases of the endocrine system, which produces hormones such as insulin. For patients who have difficulty in controlling diabetes or have multiple complications, your physician may recommend you to see an endocrinologist.

Nurse / Diabetes Educator provides health education on disease process, complication and prevention, and lifestyle modification through dietary and exercise interventions. Nurse / Diabetes Educator collaboratez with patients to develop individualized care/treatment plan and set an achievable lifestyle target. Nurse / Diabetes Educator also equips and empowers patient with self-management skills (e.g. blood glucose monitoring, insulin therapy, hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia management).

page 3

Dietitian develops individualised meal plan oriented towards patient’s goals and nutritional needs to helps patients understand how food affects their blood sugar levels and make practical eating and lifestyle habit changes, and overcome barriers to change amidst daily challenges.

Pharmacist counsels patients on their diabetes medications to enable them to understand their treatment regimen, take their medications correctly and be aware of potential side effects and how to manage them. Pharmacist reinforces the importance of medication adherence and works with patients to understand their needs and lifestyle to better ensure adherence. Pharmacist review the dose and choice of medications to ensure safety and efficacy and ensures continual access to medications with the provision of remote counselling, medication review and medication delivery.

Psychologists/ Counsellor provides goal-directed counselling and psychotherapy for diabetes distress and burnout. Psychologists/ Counsellor works collaboratively with the diabetes care team to assess, provides early detection and proactive support for addressing psychological, emotional and behavioural health problems. Psychologists/ Counsellor facilitates health behavioural change to adjust eating habits and activity levels, encourage regular blood glucose monitoring and medication adherence, and enhance diabetes self-management activities.

page 4

Physiotherapist works with patients with chronic disease to maximise a person's health and function through physical activity and exercise. This includes understanding the patient's medical history, mobility and activity level, as well as prescription of an individualised exercise program suited to the patient's needs. For patients with sub-optimally controlled diabetes, the exercise program will aim to improve blood glucose control to minimise further worsening of their medical condition(s). Physiotherapist manages musculoskeletal relatedpain and those with complex medical needs. 

Ophthalmologist is a doctor who diagnoses and treats eye diseases and eye disorders, such as cataracts, glaucoma and diabetic retinopathy. Patients with diabetes are encouraged to visit an ophthalmologist annually for a comprehensive eye examination, for early detection of eye complications caused by diabetes. 

Podiatrist specialises in conditions that affect the feet or lower legs. Podiatrist conducts diabetic foot examination to identify early signs of foot complications, thereby preventing amputation. Podiatrist provides routine foot care and manages skin conditions to prevent infections and educates patients on proper foot care and appropriate footwear.

For more information on diabetes-related care services, please refer to the following links: (1) Ancillary Services at Community Health Centre | Agency for Integrated Care (aic.sg), visit: https://www.aic.sg/care-services/community-health-centre/. (2) Services by General Practitioners (Family Medicine Clinics, Primary Care Network) | Agency for Integrated Care (aic.sg), visit: https://www.aic.sg/care-services/general-practitioner-gp/.  
